Update example project in Using GitHub's Copilot lesson (#20)
Ada-Developers-Academy/independent-ai-topics: working-w-copilot/copilot-in-projects-new-code.md

## Goals

We know how to generate code, start a chat, and work with Copilot's tools in VS Code, so now let's see what it looks like to apply what we've learned in a project. We'll take a look at a new project, [the Mastermind puzzle game in Python](https://github.com/Ada-Activities/mastermind-copilot), to see how we can use Copilot to increase our productivity.

Our goals for this lesson are to show how we can use Copilot to:
- quickly write new code that follows best practices
- help us with generating test cases

> ### !callout-info

Reviewer: It looks like the `br` tags are no longer necessary to split the paragraphs (I guess there was a change to the Markdown engine/styles). So right now, the paragraphs are too spread out. We should remove `br`s from callouts.

  >    - Why: Ensures the function only returns `True` for exact order matches, not just matching letters.
  > 
  > 3. **Guess and Code with Different Lengths**
  >    - Test: `check_code_guessed(['R', 'B', 'B'], ['R', 'B', 'B', 'P'])`
  >    - Why: Checks that the function handles mismatched lengths and returns `False`.
  > 
  > 4. **Guess and Code Both Empty**
  >    - Test: `check_code_guessed([], [])`
  >    - Why: Ensures the function returns `False` (or possibly `True` if empty is considered a match, but this should be clarified) for empty inputs.
  > 
  > 5. **Guess with Non-String Elements**
  >    - Test: `check_code_guessed([1, 2, 3, 4], ['R', 'B', 'B', 'P'])`
  >    - Why: Checks robustness against non-string input.
  >
  > Would you like me to add these tests to `test_wave_1.py`? If so, I will place them in the relevant sections and ensure they are clearly labeled as edge or nominal cases.

As we noted earlier in the lesson when reviewing our existing test suite, we have no mixed casing test for `validate_guess`. Copilot created a scenario for that, along with a host of other edge cases to consider. 

> - Since this function is meant to provide a layer of validation for us before we try to take other actions with a guess, these test scenarios have value and help reinforce that our project works at the boundaries of our game. 

Reviewer: Since we're planning to use this in the context of a game where the user types input (which is read as a string), the cases where the inputs are a mixed collection of stuff (numeric, None, but why not True/False) strike me as being of questionable value (especially in light of our PSE woes).

To that end, I'd feel better with some verbiage around some of these being a bit of a judgment call, and that given the expected use of this function, we might just as easily have decided to reject some of these suggestions.

```suggestion
- Since this function is meant to provide a layer of validation for us before we try to take other actions with a guess, these test scenarios have value and help reinforce that our project works at the boundaries of our game.
- That being said, since we know that our game will run by asking users to type input, which will be received as a string (even typing a number key produces a numeric _character_ rather than a number value), we might have decided to reject the suggested tests containing mixed inputs. _How would a user have typed the special Python value `None`?_ Taking into account the context of the system a function will be used in could lead us to include or reject suggestions. It's not always a clear case of one or the other.
```

Taking a look at the options presented for `check_code_guessed`: 
- The first two tests would provide some extra security since we did not have a mixed case test or one for the edge case where all correct letters are present in the guess, but in the wrong order. 

> - We wouldn't necessarily need options 3-6 since they handle validation that does not belong to this function's responsibilities. We should be validating a guess with our `validate_guess` function before calling `check_code_guessed`.

Reviewer: I feel like this also reinforces the notion of taking context into account that I mentioned above. We _could_ have taken these tests, but we know another part of system will handle this responsibility.

      # Act
      result = check_code_guessed(guess, code)

      # Assert
      assert not result
  ```
</details>

To see our version of the `mastermind-copilot` repo with Wave 1 completed, check out the branch [`wave_1_complete`](https://github.com/Ada-Activities/mastermind-copilot/tree/wave_1_complete).

## Summary

Copilot can help make many code tasks move faster, as long as we use it with caution. There are many ways to prompt Copilot to suggest code, but no matter how we access Copilot in the UI, we need to make sure that we give Copilot enough context to meaningfully help us. That might mean adding files to Copilot's context in chat and writing detailed prompts that cover the requirements of the code we want to generate. 

We must carefully review the tests that Copilot generates for things like missing cases or tricky edge cases. We may get lucky and have all of our bases covered, but we'll often want to add or update the tests slightly. There is no guarantee that Copilot will suggest a complete suite that covers all of our important edge cases, so we need to review what's presented critically and update or expand the suite if necessary.

> ## Check for Understanding

Reviewer: 👍 It doesn't look like I mentioned it before, but I really like the update to the questions here. Even with the essentially "all of the above" for the first one, it feels like I had to read, understand, and consider each of the options before including it in the solution. Even just a little bit of extra engagement feels helpful, as this lesson is a pretty long go!

  <summary>
    Feel free to try out the `/tests` shortcut with `generate_code` and examine the tests it generates to see which would be valuable to take as-is or update. When you're done, expand this section to see our updated test suite for <code>generate_code</code>!
  </summary>

  ```py
  # --------------------------test generate_code------------------------------------

  def test_generate_code_returns_list():
      #Arrange/Act
      result = generate_code()

      #Assert
      assert isinstance(result, list)

  def test_generate_code_length_four():
      #Arrange/Act
      result = generate_code()

      #Assert
      assert len(result) == 4

  def test_generate_code_uses_valid_letters():
      #Arrange
      valid_letters = {'R', 'O', 'Y', 'G', 'B', 'P'}

      #Act
      result = generate_code()

      #Assert
      for letter in result:
          assert letter in valid_letters

  def test_generate_code_half_or_less_duplicates_over_10_runs():
      #Arrange/Act
      # Run generate_code multiple times and check for different outputs
      codes = {tuple(generate_code()) for _ in range(10)}

      #Assert
      # At least half of the codes generated should be unique

>       assert len(codes) > 5

Author: ```suggestion
      # Arrange/Act
      # Run generate_code multiple times and check for different outputs
      runs = 10
      codes = {tuple(generate_code()) for _ in range(runs)}
      
      # Assert
      # At least half of the codes generated should be unique
      assert len(codes) > runs / 2
```

### !end-callout

## Getting Started with `Mastermind`

There is a lot we could do with the Mastermind project, but to keep us focused on areas where we can benefit from Copilot, we will use the project scaffold on the `main` branch as a starting point. 

To get started:
- Fork the [`mastermind-copilot` repo](https://github.com/Ada-Activities/mastermind-copilot)

>   - When forking, uncheck "Copy the main branch only" to ensure that all banches are copied to your fork

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When forking, uncheck "Copy the main branch only" to ensure that all branches are copied to your fork
```

Reviewer: ~~Since later when we mention particular branches, we provide links back to the  Activities copy, do we need to direct folks to fork the additional branches?~~

I see that the next lesson asks folks to start from the `improvements-start` branch, so they'll need to have it.

I'm getting a bit of deja vu (maybe from the previous version of this lesson), but in terms of timing around when students get into branching, I was looking at the curriculum planning, and it looks like this material is currently slated for week 1 of unit 2, while branching isn't until week 3. Am I reading that right?

If so, would it be worth including some additional guidance when we get to the refactorign phase about creating a new branch to store their changes, and switching to the next starting location?

    ![An excerpt from the page to fork projects showing Copy the main branch only is unchecked](assets/new-code-copilot/new_code_fork_repo_uncheck_main_only.png)
    *Fig. An excerpt from the page to fork projects showing "Copy the main branch only" is unchecked. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/new_code_fork_repo_uncheck_main_only.png))*
- Clone the repo down
- Create and activate a virtual environment
- Use `pip` to install `requirements.txt`
- Read through the `README.md` to get an understanding of the requirements of the functions we will write

Since `main` is the default branch of the repo, it should already be checked out when we clone the project down. 

There are 4 Waves of the Mastermind project.
- Wave 1 will be covered in these Copilot lessons.
- Wave 2 is left as practice for the reader. 

> - Wave 3 will be tackled together during class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 4 waves of the Mastermind project.
- Wave 1 will be covered in these Copilot lessons.
- Wave 2 is designated as the Problem Set for this topic, and should be completed prior to class.
- Wave 3 will be tackled together during class.
```

- Wave 4 we'll try out in small groups to complete the `mastermind` function in `mastermind.py` and finish our game!

> 

Reviewer: What about some kind of call to community so that folks might be less liekly to bulldoze in the breakout rooms.  I'm not _super_ excited about this, but we do end up with some domineering personalities in every cohort.

```suggestion

### !callout-info

## Preparing for Collaborative Classwork

The project accompanying this lesson has some portions to be done on your own, and some to be done in class in collaboration with others. There is no expectation that you will have prepared any materials for waves 3 or 4 prior to class, but feel free to do so if that helps you feel more ready. However, please leave space during class for others to think through how to tackle those waves in the classroom setting and be cooperative in how you share your own ideas about how to approach the challenge! ✨

### !end-callout

```

Our plan in this lesson is to:
- Write new code to complete Wave 1 of the project directions 
    - We will do this by adding the functions described in Wave 1 of the `README.md` to the file `app/game.py`
- Write new tests for our functions to cover missing edge cases

## Wave 1: `generate_code`, `validate_guess`, and `check_win_or_lose`

Opening `app/game.py`, we have a mostly empty file with some markers for adding our functions for each wave. Our first step will be to create the `generate_code` function.

### Implement `generate_code`

Based on the README, our function should generate a random 4 letter code for the user to guess. The function should:
- take no parameters
- return a list data structure with 4 elements
    - each element in the list should be a single character 
    - the characters in the list must be one of the following letters: "R", "O", "Y", "G", "B", "P"

> To get Copilot's help, let's write a comment that summarizes this information. This step of taking in the function description and synthesizing our own summary helps ensure that we truly understand the problem and requirements before reaching to an AI tool. We need this understanding as developers to be able to check if the code produced by Copilot actually meets our needs. 

Reviewer: This sounds a little smoother to me?
```suggestion
To get Copilot's help, let's write a comment that summarizes this information. This step of taking the function description and synthesizing our own summary helps ensure that we truly understand the problem and requirements before reaching for an AI tool. We need this understanding as developers to be able to check whether the code produced by Copilot actually meets our needs. 
```

> - In theory we could copy & paste the text of the `README` into the comment without ever reading it and we _might_ get something that works, but how could we even be certain if we don't have a full understanding of what is being asked for? Copilot is not meant to replace our critical thinking, but it can help us get started on the right path!

Reviewer: I appreciate addressing this thought here. But how about making a full callout?
```suggestion
### !callout-info

## Copilot Doesn't Replace Critical Thinking

In theory we could copy & paste the text of the `README` into the comment without ever reading it and we _might_ get something that works, but how could we even be certain if we don't have a full understanding of what is being asked for? Copilot is not meant to replace our critical thinking, but it can help us get started on the right path!

### !end-callout
```

To start generating our function, add the following comment to `app/game.py` then press enter to see what Copilot suggests:

```py
# generate_code 
# - takes no arguments  
# - returns a list of 4 letters
# - each letter must be one of: R, O, Y, G, B, P
```

> In our case, Copilot immediately suggests some additions to our comment as well as a function signature and body that _nearly_ matches our needs for the moment:

Reviewer: This is really weird. Copilot didn't want to generate anything for me. In the screenshot, it looks like Next Edit Suggestion kicked in for you, but I didn't get that, or even regular inline suggestion. To get anything at all I had to explicitly bring up the inline chat and paste the comment prompt there.

Then, to try again, I deleted the inserted code, and suddenly NES sprang to life and suggested inserting the code that I had just removed. I'm wondering whether there was history in your work flow that was impacting how Copilot was behaving, because then, even without the comment prompt Copilot kept suggesting I insert `generate_code`. But if I put back the function comment, it goes back to completely ignoring me.

The most consistent behavior I'm seeing is to paste in the comment prompt, and then if nothing happens, open the inline chat and do something like `implement the function described above`. I do still end up with the unimported `random` being accessed. I'm actually a little surprised for your case where NES kicked in that it didn't immediately also suggest adding the import at the top of the file.

I know that we have a message at the top about Copilot potentially behaving differently, but this feels pretty confusing and potentially blocking for a reader. I myself have gotten significantly sidetracked trying to figure out what's going on.

Author: I'll add some clarification here 👍

If we accept this suggestion, the function itself looks good, but for some reason `random` is underlined by VS Code. Why might that be?

![VS Code window showing the suggestion above accepted into the file with the symbol random underlined](assets/new-code-copilot/generate_code_random_underlined.png)
*Fig. Our function description comment with the suggestion from Copilot accepted into the file. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/generate_code_random_underlined.png))*

Copilot suggested that we use `choice` from the `random` module, but Copilot didn't add code to import the `random` module. If we tried to run this code we would get an error until we add the import statement `import random` to the file. 

To wrap up this function, let's:
1. add `import random` to the top of the file so we see the issue marker resolve
2. run our Wave 1 tests in `tests/test_wave_1.py` to ensure that the tests for `generate_code` are now passing.

### !callout-info

## Running the test files as we work

> The test files for each wave import all of the functions for the wave at the top of the file. Until we impement all the functions for a wave, we'll see test discovery errors in the VS Code testing Panel. To run our tests as we complete functions, we will need to comment out and uncomment some imports and tests in the wave files so we can see our relevant tests passing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test files for each wave import all of the functions for the wave at the top of the file. Until we implement all the functions for a wave, we'll see test discovery errors in the VS Code testing Panel. To run our tests as we complete functions, we will need to comment out and uncomment some imports and tests in the wave files so we can see our relevant tests passing.
```

<br>

> 

Reviewer: A `br` we can apparently remove.
```suggestion
```

Since `validate_guess` and `check_win_or_lose` have not been implemented yet, in `tests/test_wave_1.py` we will need to comment out those names in the import line and comment out their tests in order to run the `generate_code` tests.

> 

Reviewer: It could be confusing if folks try to run the tests through VS Code, since there will still be some errors shown for the later waves. How about a note like this?

```suggestion

Note that even with those tests commented out, if we run our tests through VS Code it will still show some test discovery errors due to the tests for waves 2 and 3. As long as the wave 1 tests are shown, you can run them and ignore the other test discovery issues. Or to avoid the errors, you can either temporarily comment out the contents of the wave 2 and 3 test files (you'll need to remember to uncomment them when you reach those waves), or stick to running the tests using `pytest`.
```

We could use a comment to try generating our `validate_guess` class method, but instead we'll use the inline chat to prompt Copilot. Let's use `⌘I` (`CMD + i`) to open an inline chat and enter the following prompt that summarizes our function requirements:

> Please write a function named validate_guess that takes in 1 parameter named guess. The input guess is a list of single characters. The function should return True if guess has a length of 4 and every element is one of the following letters: R, O, Y, G, B, P. If these conditions are not true, the function should return False. The function should be case insensitive, both the inputs ['R','Y','G','B'] and ['r','y','g','b'] should return True.

When we submit the prompt, we are likely to receive a response similar to the following:

![VS Code showing the Copilot inline chat with the prompt above entered and a function suggestion below](assets/new-code-copilot/inline_prompt_validate_guess.png)  
*Fig. Our prompt entered in the Copilot inline chat with a suggestion for the `validate_code` function from Copilot displayed below ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/inline_prompt_validate_guess.png))*

> The suggestion is succinct! The function checks `guess` for length and exits early if it can, then it uses `all` and a comprehension to check if the elements of the list are valid. But is there anything about the suggestion that is incorrect or breaking best practices? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The suggestion is succinct! The function checks `guess` for length and exits early if it can, then it uses `all` and a comprehension to check whether the elements of the list are valid. But is there anything about the suggestion that is incorrect or breaking best practices? 
```

> If we take a close look, what is the indentation like for the function? For some reason Copilot indented the function one tab further than it should have. This would create a nested function inside of `generate_code`, rather than the stand alone function we're looking for. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we take a close look, we might notice something odd about the function's indentation. For some reason Copilot indented the function one tab further than it should have. This would create a nested function inside of `generate_code`, rather than the standalone function we're looking for. 
```

Let's also take a look at the return line. The return line is 76 characters total, so it isn't breaking the PEP8 guideline of 79 characters or less for length, but we are doing a lot in that one line. We could make the function easier to read by breaking it apart. 

We could use the regenerate button to request a new response and see if Copilot fixes those issues. In our case, running the prompt a couple more times didn't fix any issues, it only moved the lines around:

![VS Code showing the Copilot inline chat with the prompt above entered and a function suggestion below](assets/new-code-copilot/inline_prompt_validate_guess_regenerated.png)  
*Fig. Our prompt entered in the Copilot inline chat with a new suggestion for the `validate_code` function from Copilot displayed below. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/inline_prompt_validate_guess_regenerated.png))*

We could add a follow up to our original request in the inline prompt to try to get the fixes desired:

> > Please update the function so that the function definition is not indented. Please break up the last line so that it is easier to read and we are not doing so much work on one line.

Reviewer: Other than the unnecesary `str` call, I liked the version using `all` rather than splitting it into an explicit `for`. 😆

Reviewer: (Unnecessary until copilot deciodes to add a test passing non-string elements. Can I say how tired I am of writing type-handling code in python? I wonder if copilot would still want to test non-string inputs if we had type hints... 😩)

Reviewer: I went back and tried with type hints, and it still wanted to do a test with non-string elements. So I yelled at it that using the function outside the defined behavior is undefined and I shouldn't have to write explicit code to enforce a particular outcome, and it conceded that was fine. I imagine that last bit was intended to be read in a sulking voice. 😆

*Fig. Our update to the prompt entered in the Copilot inline chat with a new suggestion for the `validate_code` function from Copilot displayed below. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/inline_prompt_follow_up_validate_guess.png))*

The last line was broken up as we asked for, but the function is still indented inside of `generate_code`! We could take more time going back and forth with Copilot, but since we know the changes we want to see, this is a case where maybe it wasn't worth regenerating the response or trying to ask Copilot to make the changes for us. The starting point was close enough to what we wanted that we would have been done by now if we made the changes ourselves at the start. 

As we work with tools like Copilot, it's important for us to consistently evaluate where we are spending our time. If we are spending more time trying to get a tool to do what we want than it would take for us to make the change and move on, then we are not using our time or the tool to our best advantage. 

To wrap up this function, let's:
1. accept the change
2. highlight the `validate_guess` function 

> 3. use `⌘[` (`CMD + [`) to move the function one tab left

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. use `⌘[` (`CMD` + `[`) or `Shift` + `Tab` to move the function one tab left
```

4. run the tests for `validate_guess` in `tests/test_wave_1.py`

At this point, the tests for `validate_guess` should be passing! 

> Our final code for `validate_guess` looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While your version may look different, our final code for `validate_guess` looks like:
```

```py
def validate_guess(guess):
    valid_letters = {'R', 'O', 'Y', 'G', 'B', 'P'}
    if len(guess) != 4:
        return False
    for letter in guess:
        if str(letter).upper() not in valid_letters:
            return False
    return True
```

### !callout-info

## Potential Refactoring

We'll talk more in-depth about refactoring with Copilot in the next lesson, but we want to note something worth observing now. Both of the functions we wrote so far need access to a representation of the valid letters for the game (R, O, Y, G, B, P). 

<br>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Rather than sharing that list through a global variable, that information is duplicated in both a list and a set. Especially if there are more functions that need access to this data, we should consider D.R.Ying our code!

### !end-callout

> ### Implement `check_win_or_lose`

Reviewer: I feel like this `check_win_or_lose` method is doing too much. From a game flow perspective, why would the player ever have the opportunity to enter a 9th guess to be passed to this function? The loop should have already ended before that point.

Looking ahead to the improvements-end branch reinforces this. The game loop will terminate before the number of guesses ever has an impact on the logic, making that essentially dead code.

Is that something that you would anticipate us addressing in subsequent wave work?

Author: This was a holdover from how the AC2 code challenge was structured, I've updated the function description, tests, & implementation in all the branches to only check if the game has been won to simplify its purpose and avoid dead code.

Before we ask Copilot for help, the first thing we need to do is gather information for our last Wave 1 function prompt.

We can ask Copilot to help us write something even if we don't have a template or example, but Copilot tends to produce more relevant results if we have samples to show. In the `README`, the section for `check_win_or_lose` contains a table of example inputs and outputs in addition to the function description, all of which we can share to help guide Copilot's response.

> We will use these details to craft a prompt for Copilot. This time, let's use `⌃⌘I` (`CTRL + CMD + i`) to open up the Copilot chat pane. While we do this, we want to make sure that `app/game.py` is still open. 

Reviewer: In the screenshot, it looks like you're in Agent mode. In that case, we might want to recommend using `⇧⌘I` (`Shift + CMD + i`) to open the chat pane, since that jumps directly to Agent mode (CTRL opens the pane, but lands the user in the last used mode).

Since the [modes](https://github.blog/ai-and-ml/github-copilot/copilot-ask-edit-and-agent-modes-what-they-do-and-when-to-use-them/) were added since the last version of this material, this contributes to why I'd like to see us add some additional content to Copilot Interface & Shortcuts so that we can mention these (and that, for example, the model backing the mode can be selected).

  </summary>

  **Our Prompt:**
  > Create a function named check_win_or_lose in app/game.py. The function will determine if the user making a guess has won or lost the game. should take in 3 parameters:
  >     - guess, a 4 element list representing the user's guess
  >     - code, a 4 element list representing the code the user is guessing
  >     - num_guesses, an integer that represents how many guesses a user has already made
  >
  > The function should return:
  >     - True if num_guesses is 8 or less and the inputs guess and code are identical lists.
  >     - False if num_guesses greater than 8 and the inputs guess and code are not identical lists.
  >     - None if the game is still in progress
  >
  > Here are some example inputs and outputs for the function:
  > ```
  > | guess | code | num_guesses | output |
  > |:-----:|:----:| :---------: | :----: |
  > | ['R','P','Y','G'] | ['R','P','Y','G'] | 3 | True |
  > | ['R','P','Y','G'] | ['R','P','Y','G'] | 8 | True |
  > | ['R','P','Y','G'] | ['R','P','Y','G'] | 9 | False |
  > | ['R','P','Y','G'] | ['R','R','R','R'] | 9 | False |

>   > | ['R','O','Y','G'] | ['R','R','R','R'] | 3 | None |

Reviewer: It feels a bit cheeky to me to include the markdown-formatted table of examples here. I don't know that the reader will recognize that's what this is, and I certainly wouldn't expect them to type this by hand, but if they try to copy/paste from the readme, they'll just get all the table data run together, which will probably work (heck, this is a small enough function that the examples really aren't adding much).

But it might be nice to include a note that AI agents tend to be able to understand MD formatting in inputs, and so if you can get at the raw markdown for a table of examples (such as by using the raw view in Github), that can be an easy and convenient way to provide examples in a way that preserves their structure.

  > ```
</details>

Being an AI tool, we will likely see slightly different responses, even with the same prompt. When we submit our prompt, Copilot will create a suggestion for us in the file we identified, `app/game.py`, and we have a couple buttons to decide if we want to keep this option or remove it from this file. In the screenshot below, the controls from left to right are:
- **Keep** - Adds the suggested content to the `app/game.py` file
- **Undo** - Removes the suggestion from `app/game.py`

> - **View Diff** - Moves to a view where we can see just the changed lines of `app/game.py`. This can be handy in larger files where there might be more code to sift through to see Copilot's changes.

Reviewer: 👍 Nice additional context.

```py
import random

# Wave 1
# generate_code 
# - takes no arguments  
# - returns a list of 4 letters
# - each letter must be one of: R, O, Y, G, B, P
# - letters can be repeated
# - the list is randomly generated

def generate_code():
    valid_letters = ['R', 'O', 'Y', 'G', 'B', 'P']
    return [random.choice(valid_letters) for _ in range(4)]

def validate_guess(guess):
    valid_letters = {'R', 'O', 'Y', 'G', 'B', 'P'}
    if len(guess) != 4:
        return False
    for letter in guess:
        if str(letter).upper() not in valid_letters:
            return False
    return True

# Wave 2
# Add your Wave 2 functions here

def check_win_or_lose(guess, code, num_guesses):
    # Check if the guess and code are identical (win condition)
    if guess == code:
        # Player wins if they haven't exceeded 8 guesses
        if num_guesses <= 8:
            return True
        else:
            return False
    else:
        # If guess doesn't match code, check if game should end
        if num_guesses > 8:
            return False
        else:
            # Game is still in progress
            return None

# Wave 3
# Add your Wave 3 functions here
```

> The initial code that Copilot displays looks okay, but it doesn't quite meet our needs. We forgot to mention that the comparision should be case insensitive, and we didn't include examples that would guide the tool to that information. As-is, the function does not meet the requirements of the project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial code that Copilot displays looks okay, but it doesn't quite meet our needs. We forgot to mention that the comparison should be case insensitive, and we didn't include examples that would guide the tool to that information. As-is, the function does not meet the requirements of the project. 
```

### Increasing Wave 1 Testing

These functions aren't very long, but it's still a good idea to test them as a baseline for any future changes to this class or related code. We already have some tests in `tests/test_wave_1.py`, so we're looking to make sure we aren't missing important nominal or edge cases. We'll use Copilot to help us get started on brainstorming unit tests from the inline chat.

#### Testing `generate_code` with `/tests`

For `generate_code` we'll use the `/tests` shortcut from Copilot to help us expand our test suite.

In our `app/game.py` file: 
1. highlight the first function we created `generate_code`
2. bring up the inline Copilot chat with `⌘I` (`CMD + i`)
3. type in the shortcut `/tests`

![VS Code showing generate_code highlighted inside of app/game.py with the Copilot inline chat bar showing and "/tests" typed in](assets/new-code-copilot/slash_tests_generate_code_unsubmitted.png)  
*Fig. `generate_code` selected in* `app/game.py` *with the Copilot inline chat up to enter "/tests" ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/slash_tests_generate_code_unsubmitted.png))*

> Once we hit `Enter`, Copilot will add a new pane in the VS Code window with our copilot chat at the top and a temporary file filled with unit tests for `generate_code` that we can review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we hit `Enter`, Copilot will add a new pane in the VS Code window with our Copilot chat at the top and a temporary file filled with unit tests for `generate_code` that we can review.
```

    result = generate_code()
    for letter in result:
        assert letter in valid_letters

def test_generate_code_randomness():
    # Run generate_code multiple times and check for different outputs
    codes = {tuple(generate_code()) for _ in range(10)}
    # There should be more than one unique code generated
    assert len(codes) > 1
```

Two of the Copilot suggestions, `test_generate_code_length_is_four` and `test_generate_code_contains_only_valid_letters` cover the same scenarios that we mentioned above. However, there is an optimization from one of the duplicate scenarios that we could implement! 
- The existing test `test_generate_code_uses_valid_letters` uses a list to hold the valid letters that we check the new code against. Searching this list is an `O(n)` operation that we need to take for every letter in the generated code. 
- Copilot's suggested test for the same scenario, `test_generate_code_contains_only_valid_letters`, uses a `set` to hold the valid letters instead. 

Since `set`s have an `O(1)` look up time, we could make our test more efficient by updating our test with this improvement! Let's make that change in `tests/test_wave_1.py` and keep moving!

> 

Reviewer: I agree with the general sentiment of this change, but I'd feel better with some additional context.

```suggestion

### !callout-info

## Building an Efficiency Mindset

In this test case, will it really matter whether the valid letters are stored in a `list` or a `set`? Absolutely not!

We can also recall that from a Big O standpoint, while the general time complexity to search a list is `O(n)`, if a list is always fixed size, we can consider that search to be a fixed cost, effectively becoming `O(1)`. Of course, the _absolute_ performance of using a `set` could be faster, but it's also possible that it could run slower! We must remember that Big O only tells us how performance changes with the input size, not the absolute performance for a particular size. But for code the size of the test, we're not really going to notice a difference.

We pointed out this change to highlight that complexity and performance is something that we should be thinking about no matter what code we're writing, whether application logic or tests. It's possible we could consider this case and still decide to leave it as a `list`, but it's important that we notice that this situation is something to think about in the first place.

### !end-callout

```

The two new test cases from Copilot are:
- `test_generate_code_returns_list`, which confirms the return value from `generate_code` is a list data type
- `test_generate_code_randomness`, which calls `generate_code` 10 times and checks that all the results are not identical.

Since the `README` does require that `generate_code` returns a list, we can bring the first new test into our `tests/test_wave_1.py` file as-is. The second test, `test_generate_code_randomness` requires a little more investigation.
- Does `test_generate_code_randomness` actually guarantee randomness?
- Would this test pass if we hardcoded 2 different codes that the program randomly chose between?

If we contemplate questions like this, we'll find that `test_generate_code_randomness` doesn't quite do what the title says. 

> - It cannot guarantee randomness like the title implies

Author: ```suggestion
- It cannot guarantee randomness like the title implies.
```

- It only checks if the `set` of created codes is larger than 1. This means that we could oscillate between two hardcoded values and the test would still pass. 
- It could be updated to be more stringent, but if we say the code must be different every run, the test might fail unexpectedly. 
    - We are randomly generating a code from a small pool of values, so there is a real chance we will see duplicates! 

Depending on our scenario and requirements, it could still be worth checking if across several tries the function generates different codes, but we would want the test contents and title to reflect that purpose, and to know we wouldn't get random failures if chance happened to mean that there were some duplicate codes generated. For our example, we will keep this test, but update it in a couple ways:
- Rename the test to `test_generate_code_half_or_less_duplicates_over_10_runs`

> - Change the assertion to expect the set to be at least length 5

Reviewer: I'd like to have the number of runs in a variable, and then the half check can be the number of runs divided by 2. This would prevent the half getting out of sync with the runs in the event they change.

```suggestion
- Add a variable to track the number of runs we perform in the test
- Update the comprehension expression to use the run count variable rather than a hard coded number
- Change the assertion to expect the `set` length to be at half the number of runs

Using a variable to hold the number of runs enables the test to be written so that the runs and assertion check will always remain in sync, even if we come back and change the number of runs at some later date!
```

Once we bring these updates and new tests into `tests/test_wave_1.py`, we can close the suggestion pane that Copilot opened since we do not want to create a new file for the `generate_code` tests.

<br>

<details>
  <summary>

>     Feel free to try out the `/tests` shortcut with `generate_code` and examine the tests it generates to see which would be valuable to take as-is or update. When you're done, expand this section to see our updated test suite for <code>generate_code</code>!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Feel free to try out the <code>/tests</code> shortcut with <code>generate_code</code> and examine the tests it generates to see which would be valuable to take as-is or update. When you're done, expand this section to see our updated test suite for <code>generate_code</code>!
```

  </summary>

  ```py
  # --------------------------test generate_code------------------------------------

  def test_generate_code_returns_list():

>       #Arrange/Act

Reviewer: The comments here lost the space between the `#` and the text

      result = generate_code()

      #Assert
      assert isinstance(result, list)

  def test_generate_code_length_four():
      #Arrange/Act
      result = generate_code()

      #Assert
      assert len(result) == 4

  def test_generate_code_uses_valid_letters():
      #Arrange
      valid_letters = {'R', 'O', 'Y', 'G', 'B', 'P'}

      #Act
      result = generate_code()

      #Assert
      for letter in result:
          assert letter in valid_letters

  def test_generate_code_half_or_less_duplicates_over_10_runs():
      #Arrange/Act
      # Run generate_code multiple times and check for different outputs
      codes = {tuple(generate_code()) for _ in range(10)}

      #Assert
      # At least half of the codes generated should be unique

>       assert len(codes) > 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # Arrange/Act
      # Run generate_code multiple times and check for different outputs
      runs = 10
      codes = {tuple(generate_code()) for _ in range(runs)}

      # Assert
      # At least half of the codes generated should be unique
      assert len(codes) > runs / 2
```

  ```
</details>

#### Testing `validate_guess` and `generate_code` 

We saw an issue with using `/tests` from the inline chat when we already have a test suite. Rather than taking our existing tests into account and only suggesting new scenarios, we were given some duplicate test cases for `generate_code`. 

To help us save time and avoid reviewing test cases that won't be helpful, we want a way to interact with Copilot that ensures it has context about what we are working on and what already exists in the project. This time we'll open the Copilot Chat pane and use the "Add Context" feature to provide Copilot with more information. 

Before we jump into prompting, the first thing we should do is review our tests so we know what we have and can get an idea of what we might be missing. 

<br>

<details>
  <summary>

>     Check out the tests in VS Code, or open this drop down to see the current test suites for <code>validate_guess</code> and <code>generate_code</code>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Check out the tests in VS Code, or open this drop down to see the current test suites for <code>validate_guess</code> and <code>check_win_or_lose</code>.
```

  </summary>

  ```py
  # --------------------------test validate_guess------------------------------------

def test_validate_guess_false_length_greater_than_four():

>     #Arrange

Reviewer: It looks like the comment spacing might be an issue in a few places.

    #Arrange
    guess = ['R','B','B','P']
    code = ['R','B','B','P']
    num_guesses = 9

    #Act
    result = check_win_or_lose(guess, code, num_guesses)

    #Assert
    assert result is False

def test_check_win_or_lose_none_if_game_ongoing():
    #Arrange
    guess = ['R','B','B','P']
    code = ['R','B','B','O']
    num_guesses = 2

    #Act
    result = check_win_or_lose(guess, code, num_guesses)

    #Assert
    assert result is None
  ```
</details>

Reviewing the test suite, something that stands out is that `validate_guess` should be case insensitive – though we have tests with all capitalized and all lowercased letters, we don't have a test for a mixed case guess. Let's keep this in mind as we work with Copilot to explore possible additional tests!

Now that we are refreshed on our test suites, let's use the "`+`" button at the top of the Copilot chat pane to start a new chat.

![The top of the Copilot chat panel highlighting the plus button](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_new_chat.png)  
*Fig. The "New Chat" button in the Copilot chat pane's UI ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_new_chat.png))*

> By default, the Copilot chat adds the currently focused file as context for the conversation. Even if you have multiple panes and tabs open, only the file with current editing focus will be added to the chat context. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether this is a version difference or something else, but my Copilot only _suggests_ using the current file as context. It even  _looks_ like it might be using it as context. But if I hover over the plus, it reveals that I need to click the plus to add the file to the context.

If I _don't_ explicitly add context, the Agent mode starts by performing a search for terms it thinks are relevant. Like if I ask it to propose tests for `validate_guess`, it searches the entire codebase for `validate_guess`, then uses those files where it's found as the context.

The subsequent steps about the Open Editor option to add everything that's currently open still works as described, but maybe we should rephrase the bit about the currently focused file being context?

<img width="290" height="110" alt="Screenshot 2025-08-21 at 14 08 19" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3df17dfb-10d6-4989-a4bb-daa11ee02978" />

Reviewer: It looks like Ask and Edit mode automatically select the current file as context, but Agent is more variable (https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/copilot/chat/copilot-chat-context#_implicit-context)

Reviewer: Maybe a shift such as (also on the image catpion)
```suggestion
Depending on the mode, the Copilot chat may select the currently focused file as context for the conversation, or it may only suggest it. Even if you have multiple panes and tabs open, only the file with current editing focus will be given this treatment. 
```

![VS Code with both app/game.py and tests/test_wave_1.py open in one panel and Copilot's chat open in another panel. app/game.py has editor focus. The file name app/game.py is circled with an arrow that points to the Current File context bubble in the Copilot chat pane showing the same file name.](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_tests_default_context.png)  

> *Fig. By default, only the open file with editor focus is added as context to a new Copilot chat. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_tests_default_context.png))*

Reviewer: Consistency with the current context behavior recommendation above.
```suggestion
*Fig. By default, only the open file with editor focus is considered for context in a new Copilot chat. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_tests_default_context.png))*
```

This is great when you are only asking questions about a single file, however, we want the chat to know about the functions in `app/game.py` _and_ our existing tests in `tests/test_wave_1.py`. Under "Add Context" Copilot's chat has an "Open Editors" option that will add all currently open files as context, even if they are not in editor focus. Let's use this to our advantage!

1. With our new chat open, open both `app/game.py` and `tests/test_wave_1.py` in the editor pane.
2. In the Copilot chat window, press "Add Context".
3. From the dropdown that appears, select "Open Editors".

> ![VS Code with the select context menu for Copilot's chat pane. The Add Context button and Open Editors option are ciricled.](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_add_context_open_editor.png)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![VS Code with the select context menu for Copilot's chat pane. The Add Context button and Open Editors option are circled.](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_add_context_open_editor.png)  
```

*Fig. VS Code's UI for adding all open editors as context to Copilot Chat. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/chat_pane_add_context_open_editor.png))*

> Once "Open Editors" is selected, we'll see both `app/game.py` and `tests/test_wave_1.py`show up in the context section of the Copilot chat. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once "Open Editors" is selected, we'll see both `app/game.py` and `tests/test_wave_1.py` show up in the context section of the Copilot chat. 
```

- In the Copilot chat UI, the "`X`" button next to each file name in the context section will let you remove a file from context. 
- Whichever file has focus will show up twice in the list, since there is always a "`Current File`" context bubble. 

> ![VS Code's Copilot chat pane with app/game.py and tests/test_wave_1.py ciricled in the context section.](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_after_adding_context.png)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![VS Code's Copilot chat pane with app/game.py and tests/test_wave_1.py circled in the context section.](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_after_adding_context.png)  
```

*Fig. `app/game.py` and `tests/test_wave_1.py` added as context to Copilot Chat. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_after_adding_context.png))*

Now that Copilot can see our code and tests, let's start prompting! We can write a shorter prompt and may still get okay results, but to be effective with our time we can be clear with instructions for:
- What we want help with
- Where specific relevant code exists
- Where we want changes made
- Explaining suggestions to ensure we grow our understanding and have that knowledge for the future 

<br>

<details>
  <summary>

>     Using what we've learned about prompting so far and the points above as a template, try out writing a prompt to update the test suites for <code>validate_guess</code> and <code>generate_code</code>. When you're done, expand this section to see our prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Using what we've learned about prompting so far and the points above as a template, try out writing a prompt to update the test suites for <code>validate_guess</code> and <code>check_win_or_lose</code>. When you're done, expand this section to see our prompt.
```

  </summary>

  **Prompt:**
  > I would like to expand the test suites for the functions validate_guess and check_win_or_lose in game.py to cover missing edge or nominal test cases. 
  > 
  > The current tests live in test_wave_1.py. I would like any new tests added to test_wave_1.py in the relevant sections of the file. 
  > 

>   > What other test cases would be useful? For any suggested tests, please describe why they would be useful and what specific missing scenario they are accounting for.

Reviewer: 👍 Love this snippet

</details>

Once we press enter, exact responses will vary, but Copilot should respond with information around:
- analyzing `validate_guess` and `generate_code` in `app/game.py`
- analyzing current test coverage or cases for each function in `tests/test_wave_1.py`
- describing what the current tests cover and what scenarios are missing

> Copilot will also generate the unit tests for the new tests cases it identified inside `tests/test_wave_1.py` for us to preview. 

Reviewer: Copilot only generated the proposal for me, and followed up with a "would you like me to add these?" This felt like a large enough difference to mention explicitly.

```suggestion
Copilot might also generate the unit tests for the new tests cases it identified inside `tests/test_wave_1.py` for us to preview, but we might need to direct it to do so after reviewing the scenarios it proposes.
```

![VS Code previewing new tests for validate_guess and check_win_or_lose in the editor pane next to the Copilot chat pane discussing the newly added scenarios](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_review_suggestions.png)  
*Fig. Copilot previewing new tests for `validate_guess` and `generate_code` in `tests/test_wave_1.py`. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_review_suggestions.png))*

> If we have testing set up in VS Code, Copilot may offer to run the new tests so we can see if they pass. We want to run the tests since Copilot will give us some more information based on the results. In fact, when working on this lesson, we didn't get a full breakdown of why the new test cases were useful until we took this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we have testing set up in VS Code, Copilot may offer to run the new tests so we can see whether they pass. We want to run the tests since Copilot will give us some more information based on the results. In fact, when working on this lesson, we didn't get a full breakdown of why the new test cases were useful until we took this step.
```

- We can allow the tests to run with the "`Continue`" button, or use the drop down to explore permissions options for this feature. 
  - Feel free to follow your curiosity around how you can customize aspects of Copilot! 
  ![UI in the Copilot chat pane asking to run the generated tests during preview.](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_run_tests_ui.png)  
  *Fig. UI in the Copilot chat pane asking to run the generated tests during preview. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_chat_pane_run_tests_ui.png))*

> Once we've ran the new tests and receive a desciption of the missing scenarios and why they would be useful, we can review that information and check it against our needs and the requirements in the `README.md`. We should review:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we've ran the new tests and receive a description of the missing scenarios and why they would be useful, we can review that information and check it against our needs and the requirements in the `README.md`. We should review:
```

  >    - Scenario covered: Validates that None values in the guess list are rejected
  > 
  > For check_win_or_lose:
  > 1. test_check_win_or_lose_true_at_max_guesses
  >    - Why useful: Tests the boundary condition at exactly 8 guesses
  >    - Scenario covered: Ensures player can still win on the 8th (final) guess
  >
  > 2. test_check_win_or_lose_true_with_mixed_case_guess
  >    - Why useful: Verifies case insensitivity in win condition
  >    - Scenario covered: Ensures mixed case guesses can still result in wins
  >
  > 3. test_check_win_or_lose_true_at_first_guess
  >    - Why useful: Tests minimum boundary (first guess win)
  >    - Scenario covered: Validates that players can win immediately on their first try
  >
  > 4. test_check_win_or_lose_false_exceeds_max_with_wrong_guess
  >    - Why useful: Clarifies behavior when exceeding guesses with wrong answer
  >    - Scenario covered: Ensures that exceeding guess limit always returns False, regardless of guess content

  **Suggested Tests:**
  ```py
  # ----validate_guess tests----

  def test_validate_guess_false_empty_list():
      #Arrange
      guess = []

      #Act
      result = validate_guess(guess)

      #Assert

>       assert result is False

Reviewer: [Off topic] In other tests we write, should we consider migrating to `is` checks for boolean results?

Author: Ahh, this was a holdover from the original implementation... I think using `is` makes the assertion clearer at first glance, but I also think most tests would just be written as `assert variable`. It's something I'm happy to bring up to folks, but I feel it might be more useful to get folks used to seeing `assert <boolean>`.

Reviewer: The thing that bother me about `assert variable` in tests is that it doesn't enforce the type. Like if we have a function that's defined as returning True or False, I'd like my (internal) test to ensure I didn't side-step that spec and leak out something truthy/falsy that a caller might then become dependent on.

Like `if variable:`? Absolutely. But in a test, I want that to be as specific as possible.

For `assert var == True`, it's almost specific, except that python considers `1 == True` to be true. But since True and False are singletons in Python, `var is True` ensures that `var` is not just truthy, but the value True.

      #Assert
      assert result is False
  ```
</details>

As we noted earlier in the lesson when reviewing our existing test suite, we have no mixed casing test for `validate_guess`. Copilot created a test for that scenario along with a host of other edge cases to consider. Overall, the test cases Copilot presented help reinforce that our project works at the boundaries of our game, especially tests like `test_check_win_or_lose_true_at_max_guesses` and `test_check_win_or_lose_true_at_first_guess` that confirm we don't have unexpected behavior in `check_win_or_lose` at the start or end of a game.

These test scenarios have value, their names reflect what they are doing, and they even follow a similar layout to our existing tests in the file with our "Arrange", "Act", and "Assert" sections. We can use the keep button in either the `tests/test_wave_1.py` preview or the Copilot chat pane to accept the changes, and we are wrapped up with Wave 1!

![VS Code previewing new tests for validate_guess and check_win_or_lose in the editor pane next to the Copilot chat pane with the keeps buttons on each pane circled](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_keep_generated_suggestions.png)  

> *Fig. Vs Code editor and Copilot Chat buttons for accepting code suggestions. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_keep_generated_suggestions.png))*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Fig. VS Code editor and Copilot Chat buttons for accepting code suggestions. ([Full size image](assets/new-code-copilot/tests_keep_generated_suggestions.png))*
```
